FARMING GOD’S WAY
    Field Guide
      2nd Edition




     By Grant Dryden
Farming God’s Way
Farming God’s Way is a resource given to the wider body of
Christ, to serve the poor and deliver them from the yoke of
poverty.

Reproduction
Copyright © 2022 GW Dryden

Copies of this publication can be downloaded from
www.farming-gods-way.org

Reproduction and dissemination of this publication in unaltered form
for educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorized
without any prior written permission from the copyright holder
provided the source is fully acknowledged with the recommended
citation below.

Reproduction of material in this publication for resale or other
commercial purposes is permitted only with written permission of the
author, G.W. Dryden – info@farming-gods-way.org

The statements, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this
guide are those of the author.

Recommended Citation
Farming God’s Way Field Guide 2nd Edition. Dryden, G.W., 2022

Sponsors
The Field Guide, was sponsored by the Bountiful Grains Trust, Port
Elizabeth, RSA.

Orders
To order the training Video series or printed copies of any of the
Farming God's Way resources: Email: info@farming-gods-way.org
                                    Farming God’s Way


Overview .....................................................................................................1

Biblical Keys ................................................................................................3
      Key 1: Acknowledge God and God Alone ..............................4
      Key 2: Consider your Ways ...........................................................7
      Key 3: Understanding God’s All Sufficiency ..............................9
      Key 4: What you Sow you Will Reap .........................................12
      Key 5: Bringing the Tithes and Offerings to God .....................14
      Key 6: Stake your Claim ..............................................................16

Technology Keys ....................................................................................17
    Step by Step Procedure ..............................................................19
    20 Reasons why we do the How ...............................................27
    Composting ...................................................................................31
    Biodiversity Through Alternative Crops .....................................35

Management Keys ................................................................................38
   Key 1: On Time ..............................................................................38
   Key 2: To High Standards.............................................................39
   Key 3: With Minimal Wastage.....................................................40
   Key 4: With the Fruit of the Spirit .................................................41

Extension ...................................................................................................43

Resources..................................................................................................45
Overview


                     Farming God's Way
         Equipping the poor for abundant life in Christ

The African continent has the most natural resources of all the world’s
continents. It has vast resources of minerals, precious metals and oil;
excellent agricultural potential; wonderful people; plenty of water;
and exceptional wildlife biodiversity.

In contrast to her potential, Africa is also the most poverty stricken,
with extremely low standards of living, famines, high levels of
undernourishment, shocking infant mortality rates, disease, wars,
dependency, poor education, deforestation, corruption and high
inflation as hallmarks of what the continent represents.

Subsistence farmers account for a very high percentage of the
African population who are living undernourished and degraded
lives. The current yields of these farmers are well below their family’s
food security requirements, which necessitates the importation of
millions of tons of grain every year.

Farming God’s Way is an amazing Godly solution to the food security
and poverty crisis for the rural poor. Farming God’s Way is not just a
technology but a well-balanced biblical, management and
technological solution for the agricultural domain, equipping the poor
to come out of poverty with what God has put in their hands and
revealing the fullness of Jesus’ promised abundant life.




                                     1
                             Biblical




              Management                Technology




Out of the transformation of the heart, through Jesus, comes the
renewal of the mind in good management and then the redemptive
purpose of God on the farmland.

Farming God’s Way is a free gift given to the wider body of Christ and
is a non-denominational, non-organisational, relational network of
people, who share a heartfelt consideration for the poor. The
integrity, flow and strategy of Farming God's Way is given by a
voluntary senior stewardship team, who are well experienced trainers.
The principle of stewardship rather than ownership has been kept to
ensure the liberal expansion of this incredible tool to transform the
lives of the poor.

The Word of God says in Hosea 4:6 “My people perish because of a
lack of knowledge.” We must acknowledge the importance of
teaching the poor faithfulness in the agricultural domain, before the
rest of the continent’s potential can be revealed.




                                   2
Biblical Keys


  No technology will be able to break the curse of poverty
                over the lives of the poor.
         Both Word and deed need to be applied

God’s Word is the ultimate authority for the truths we live by and
turning to His Word brings the revelation and enlightenment that the
yoke is first and foremost a spiritual yoke. If we only deal with the
technical and management keys we will not be able to deliver the
poor.

    Hosea 4:1-3 “Listen to the word of the Lord, O sons of Israel,
    For the Lord has a case against the inhabitants of the land,
    Because there is no faithfulness or kindness, Or knowledge of God
    in the land. There is swearing, deception, murder, stealing and
    adultery. They employ violence, so that bloodshed follows
    bloodshed. Therefore the land mourns,
    And everyone who lives in it languishes Along with the beasts of
    the field and the birds of the sky, And also the fish of the sea
    disappear.”

    Psalm 107:33,34 “He changes rivers into a wilderness, And springs
    of water into a thirsty ground; A fruitful land into a salt waste,
    Because of the wickedness of those who dwell in it.”

    Jeremiah 23:10b “For the land mourns because of the curse.
    The pastures of the wilderness have dried up.”

In this section the 6 Biblical keys will unveil the mysteries of why Africa
is bound under the yoke of poverty and reveal the Godly solutions for
breaking this yoke.




                                     3
Key 1: Acknowledge God and God Alone



Problem:
The people of Africa have enormous strongholds of witchcraft and
ancestral worship. Witchdoctors and wizards are found in great
numbers in every village and are consulted on most things, at all
critical stages of life including birth, sickness, adolescence,
circumcision, weddings and funerals. The witchdoctors are also
brought in to pray over the land so that it will produce a bumper
harvest. Here they perform rituals including sacrificing chickens,
sprinkling of animal blood, spreading bones, placing potions and
putting of animal skulls on corner posts.

The practise of ancestral worship is the honouring of one’s dead
ancestors through sacrifices, ritual rites and ceremonial oaths. This
worship is not practised out of love but out of fear and terror.

    Isaiah 8:19-22 ‘When they say to you, “Consult the mediums and
    the spiritists who whisper and mutter,” should not a people consult
    their God? Should they consult the dead on behalf of the living?
    To the law and to the testimony! If they do not speak according
    to this word, it is because they have no dawn. They will pass
    through the land hard-pressed and famished, and it will turn out
    that when they are hungry, they will be enraged and curse their
    king and their God as they face upward. Then they will look to the
    earth, and behold, distress and darkness, the gloom of anguish;
    and they will be driven away into darkness.’

    Leviticus 19:31 “Do not turn to mediums or spiritists; do not seek
    them out to be defiled by them. I am the Lord your God.”

    Deuteronomy 18:10,11 “There shall not be found among you
    anyone who makes his son or his daughter pass through the fire,
    one who uses divination, one who practices witchcraft, or one
    who interprets omens, or a sorcerer, or one who casts a spell, or a
    medium, or a spiritist, or one who calls up the dead.”




                                    4
    Deuteronomy 5:7,8 “You shall have no other gods before Me.
    You shall not make for yourself an idol, or any likeness of what is in
    heaven above or on the earth beneath or in the water under the
    earth”

    Matthew 6:24 “No one can serve two masters; for either he will
    hate the one and love the other, or he will be devoted to one
    and despise the other.”

    Psalm 24:3,4 “Who may ascend into the hill of the Lord?
    And who may stand in His holy place? He who has clean hands
    and a pure heart, Who has not lifted up his soul to falsehood
    And has not sworn deceitfully.”

Solution:
There is only one true God and we come to Him through His Son,
Jesus Christ, who died on a cross for us to have the free gift of eternal
life. We are now no longer of this world’s system and traditions but we
have been adopted into His family and we have the privilege of
knowing God as our Father.

We have to come back to worshipping God and God alone in all
areas of our lives, not just at our Sunday church services. God is not
mocked.
    Proverbs 3:5,6: “Trust in the LORD with all your heart and do not
    lean on your own understanding. In all your ways acknowledge
    Him, and He will make your paths straight.”

This scripture gives us the guidelines to the breakthrough.

Trust in the Lord with all of your Heart:
Whomever we trust in, we will consult.

Lean not on your own Understanding:
Jesus fulfilled all that He could, not through independence but rather
dependence on His Father. His Father showed Him what to do, He did
it and succeeded.

     John 8:28 “So Jesus said, ‘When you lift up the Son of Man, then
     you will know that I am He, and I do nothing on My own initiative,
     but I speak these things as the Father taught Me’”

                                     5
     John 8:38 “I speak the things which I have seen with My Father;
     therefore you also do the things which you heard from your
     father.”

     John 5:19 “Therefore Jesus answered and was saying to them,
     “Truly, truly, I say to you, the Son can do nothing of Himself, unless
     it is something He sees the Father doing; for whatever the Father
     does, these things the Son also does in like manner.”

What a glorious life we would live if we fulfilled His every desire for us.

In all Your Ways Acknowledge Him:
In all our ways means just that – every area, work, word, action and
thought. This means we acknowledge Him in birth, adulthood
transitions, weddings, funerals, healing, pre-planting, rainfall, harvest –
everything.

And He will make your Paths Straight:
In the African continent we desperately need the Lord to straighten
out our crooked and hopeless path which has been taking people on
a journey to nowhere for too long. God’s straightening will lead us into
the fullness of His promised abundant life.

     Deuteronomy 8:18,19 cautions us "But you shall remember the
     Lord your God, for it is He who is giving you power to make
     wealth, that He may confirm His covenant which He swore to
     your fathers, as it is this day. It shall come about if you ever forget
     the Lord your God and go after other gods and serve them and
     worship them, I testify against you today that you will surely
     perish.”

     Deuteronomy 7:13-15 “He will love you and bless you and
     multiply you; He will also bless the fruit of your womb and the fruit
     of your ground, your grain and your new wine and your oil, the
     increase of your herd and the young of your flock, in the land
     which He swore to your forefathers to give you. You shall be
     blessed above all peoples; there will be no male or female
     barren among you or among your cattle. The Lord will remove
     from you all sickness; and He will not put on you any of the
     harmful diseases of Egypt which you have known.”


                                     6
If we believe that it is indeed Africa’s time, then we have to tear
down the high places of ancestral worship and set aside the traditions
of witchcraft, which have kept us in bondage.
Then we can come and ascend the hill of the Lord with clean hands
and pure hearts to worship Him alone, in Spirit and in truth.




Key 2: Consider your Ways

Problem:
The temples of our lives are in ruins because we have been serving
our own selfish ambitions and futile ways and not walking in God’s
ways. If we, as the children of God, are the temple of God as God
has said, then the state of our temple is something to consider. We
must consider our ways!!!

     Haggai 1:2-11”Consider your ways.”

A few examples of the curses we live under because our ways are not
aligned to God’s ways include:

a) The Curse through Bloodshed and Violence
    •   Story of Cain and Abel
    •   Many examples in Africa
    •   Isaiah 59:3 “For your hands are defiled with blood and your
        fingers with iniquity.”

b) The Curse of a Short Life
When God created mankind, his blueprint was that we would live
forever with Him in heartfelt relationship. It is very clear from scripture
that the lifespan of man was firstly limited after the fall of man in the
garden of Eden, and reduced even further as a result of the
wickedness of man before the flood. However, mankind continues to
stray from relationship with God and instead chooses to walk in his
own wicked ways and as a result, this limited lifespan is shortened
even further.

     Proverbs 10:27 “The fear of the Lord prolongs life, but the years of
     the wicked will be shortened.”

                                     7
     Psalm 34:12 “Who is the man who desires life and loves length of
     days that he may see good? Depart from evil and do good.”

     1 Thessalonians 4:3 “For this is the will of God, your sanctification;
     that is, that you abstain from sexual immorality.”
     Romans 6:23 “For the wages of sin is death, but the free gift of
     God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord.”

c) The Curse on What the Land Produces (poor yields)
In Haggai it is interesting to read that it is God who is the One to
withhold the rain and the produce from the ground.

Solution: Restoring the Temple
In our efforts to find the Godly solutions to difficult questions like the
abject poverty around us, we begin by considering our ways for we
are the temple of the living God.

When each of us make the effort to consider our ways, change our
own lives and influence the lives of our families and communities, we
can collectively make a significant difference in our nations.

     1 Peter 2:5 “You also, as living stones, are being built up as a
     spiritual house for a holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices
     acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.”

     Haggai 2:18-19 “Do consider from this day onward, from the
     twenty-fourth day of the ninth month; from the day when the
     temple of the Lord was founded, consider: Is the seed still in the
     barn? Even including the vine, the fig tree, the pomegranate
     and the olive tree, it has not borne fruit. Yet from this day on I will
     bless you.’ ”

     1 Thessalonians 2:12 “….walk in a manner worthy of the God who
     calls you into His own kingdom and glory.”

     2 Corinthians 6:16-7:1 “God said, "I will dwell in them and walk
     among them; and I will be their God and they shall be My
     people. Therefore, come out from their midst and be separate,"
     says the Lord. "and do not touch what is unclean; and I will
     welcome you, and I will be a Father to you, and you shall be sons
     and daughters to Me," says the Lord Almighty.

                                      8
     Therefore, having these promises, beloved, let us cleanse
     ourselves from all defilement of flesh and spirit, perfecting
     holiness in the fear of God.”

Let us as His sons and daughters be committed to rebuild the temple
of God in our lives, by considering our ways and aligning them to
God’s ways, not just in Spirit, but in mind and body as well.




Key 3: Understanding God’s All Sufficiency

Problem:
The dependency syndrome has been created over many years of
handouts and expectations and yet the demand seems to increase
yearly. There is absolutely no way that Africa will realize its God given
potential, unless Africans do.

Isaiah 58 reminds us that we should be fulfilling the true fast, to loosen,
remove and break the yoke. One of the buckles of the yoke of
poverty is the dependency syndrome.

Since the beginning of man’s creation, he has always tried to be self-
sufficient, doing things his own way, relying on his own wisdom rather
than following the Lord’s wisdom. This has led to his downfall in so many
ways.

Solution: Knowing God’s All Sufficiency
In Farming God's Way, we do not advocate self-sufficiency, but rather
embrace God’s all sufficiency which leads us to make a profit.

He is our source of everything and in Him we find increase. God’s all
sufficiency is never ending, with no limits to His reserves, as He has no
limits.

     2 Corinthians 9:8 “and God is able to make all grace overflow to
     you, so that, always having all sufficiency in everything, you may
     have an abundance for every good deed;”



                                     9
Breakthrough comes as we repent for depending on man, including
ourselves, lay aside our pride, humble ourselves and acknowledge that
He truly is the source of everything we need. We just need the Lord to
open our eyes to see what resources are available to us.

Knowing God’s all sufficiency shatters the dependency syndrome.
   2 Chronicles 14:11 “Then Asa called to the Lord his God and said,
   "Lord, there is no one besides You to help in the battle between
   the powerful and those who have no strength; so help us, O Lord
   our God, for we trust in You, and in Your name have come
   against this multitude. O Lord, You are our God; let not man
   prevail against You."

God’s All Sufficiency in YOU
   Deuteronomy 8:18 “You shall remember the Lord your God, for it
   is He who gives you power to make wealth.”

God’s All Sufficiency with Agriculture
   Gen 2:15 “Then the Lord God took the man and put him into the
   Garden of Eden to cultivate it and keep it.”

God’s All Sufficiency with the Land
The land has been given to us by God to steward, cultivate and to
care for. It doesn’t belong to us, it is His.

    1 Corinthians 10:26 “The earth is the Lords and all it contains”

    Leviticus 25:23 “The land, moreover, shall not be sold
    permanently, for the land is Mine; for you are but aliens and
    sojourners with Me.”

God’s All Sufficiency with Seed
When God created plants He created them to be able to reproduce
after their own kind.

    Genesis 1:11-13 “Then God said, "Let the earth sprout vegetation,
    plants yielding seed, and fruit trees on the earth bearing fruit
    after their kind with seed in them"; and it was so. There was
    evening and there was morning, a third day.”




                                   10
There are 3 different kinds of seeds available to farmers:
1) Open Pollinated Varieties (OPV’s)
2) Hybrids – seed cannot be stored and replanted
3) Genetically Modified Seed (GMO) - seed cannot be stored and
   replanted.

God’s All Sufficiency with God’s Blanket
God’s Blanket is such an amazing provision that allows for so many
wonderful benefits – see details in 20 reasons why we do the how.

God’s All Sufficiency with Inputs
(Manure, Anthill Soil, Compost)
In order to reap a good harvest there has to be a determination to
sow of one’s own available inputs.

God’s All Sufficiency in Tools
Exodus 4:2 God asks Moses the question “What is that in your hand?”
Moses replied “a staff.”
What do we have in our hand, as the instrument to break poverty
and the crisis of food insecurity in your community?
The answer is “A hoe.”

God’s All Sufficiency in Rain and Increase
In His provision of rain God blesses His children and with it He brings
seeds to life and increases the harvest.




                                    11
Key 4: What you Sow you Will Reap


Problem:
Many communities are living in areas that have no opportunities for
any development at all. These people have settled for less, simply
because of the availability of free food and have never left. They
have become comfortable in the security of knowing that their
provider will be there when they are in need again. If we continue to
perpetuate dependency on man, we encourage the poor to look to
the wrong source of provision, man and not God.

    2 Thessalonians 3:10 “If a man will not work then neither should
    he eat.”

Work is not a curse it is a blessing. Most of these poor people have land
in the rural areas which is lying idle. Africa is known as the begging bowl
of the world, however God can turn that around, transforming the
begging bowl into a bread basket.

God’s way is that people should develop according to His principles,
where He rewards based on sowing and reaping, on stewardship and
being faithful with what you have been entrusted with.

Solution: We Need to Become Givers
Once we understand that God is our source and that His all
sufficiency is truly available to us, we can look at giving our way out
of dependency and into His promise.

    Acts 20:35 “it is more blessed to give than to receive”

The transition from a receiving to a giving mentality has far reaching
effects, even extending into the reaching of the nations with the
good news of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

    Luke 6:38 “Give, and it will be given to you. Good measure,
    pressed down, shaken together, running over, will be put into
    your lap. For with the measure you use it will be measured back
    to you.”


                                    12
     Proverbs 28:19 “Whoever works his land will have plenty of bread,
     but he who follows worthless pursuits will have plenty of poverty.”

In farming there is no greater example of this principle where we
continually need to be sowing in order to reap a harvest. We need to
sow our seed, fertiliser and other inputs, labour, time, management
and capital.

If you give nothing to even good potential soil, you get nothing in
return. We can’t keep on taking and not giving something back. The
Bible says we will reap what we sow. 0 x 0 = 0, 0 x 100 = 0, 0 inputs in
22,222 holes equals 0.

How then should you sow:

1) Sow Bountifully
     Corinthians 9:6 “Now this I say, he who sows sparingly will also
     reap sparingly, and he who sows bountifully will also reap
     bountifully.”

2) Sow Knowledgeably
In most of Africa it is not a case of idleness or apathy that is causing
the dire poverty levels, it is often a lack of knowledge.
     Hosea 4:6 “My people perish for a lack of knowledge”

3) Sow Faithfully
A secret of Farming God's Way is to start small and be faithful with
little. In Luke 16:10 it says, "He who is faithful in a very little thing is
faithful also in much;”

Sow with Joy
The attitude with which we sow is crucial.

     2 Corinthians 9:7 “Each one must do just as he has decided in his
     heart, not reluctantly or under compulsion, for God loves a
     cheerful giver.”
     Nehemiah 8:10b “for the joy of the Lord is your strength.”

Our joy is firstly founded in the Lord, but that same joy should move
through every part of our lives and into the work of our hands.

                                       13
Key 5: Bringing the Tithes and Offerings to God


Considering God’s character, power and resources, how can it be
possible to steal from Him? According to the scriptures in Malachi 3, it
is possible to rob God through our tithes and offerings. This scripture
was written in an agricultural society and the hearts of the people in
their giving back to God has significant agricultural consequences.

Malachi 3:8-10 “Will a man rob God? Yet you are robbing Me! But you
say, ‘How have we robbed You?’ In tithes and offerings. You
are cursed with a curse, for you are robbing Me, the whole nation of
you! Bring the whole tithe into the storehouse, so that there may
be food in My house,”

The tithe, although implemented by giving to the church or wherever
ones leading is to give, is actually a giving back to God. God really
doesn’t need our increase or wealth, but it shows Him where our
hearts lie as we acknowledge Him first in our giving.

    Proverbs 3:9 “Honor the Lord from your wealth, and from the first
    of all your produce;”

    Matthew 6:21” for where your treasure is, there your heart will be
    also.”

Whether we give the widows ‘mite’ or millions of dollars a month, is
irrelevant to God. He knows what we have and how much it costs us
to give to Him. The widows ‘mite’ is more-costly than a multi-million
dollar cash injection into the Lords’ house. The Lord knows the state of
our hearts before we give and He will measure the blessing based on
this heart evaluation and not the amount.




                                   14
The incredible part of this giving back to God is that it is all for our
benefit. It was not orchestrated by God for the storehouse’s sake but
rather the givers blessing. The blessing comes to the giver threefold:

1) God promises He will open up the floodgates of heaven and pour
   out a blessing until it overflows.

2) God himself will rebuke the devourer so that he will not destroy
   the fruits of the soil…

3) God will cause all nations to call you blessed because you will be
   called a delight.

Giving to the Lord brings Him honour and acknowledges Him in a way
we can’t understand. Giving to the Lord forces us to consider a cause
outside of ourselves and begins the journey into selflessness where we
put His Kingdom before our own selfish end.




                                   15
Key 6: Stake your Claim


We should be taking God into all areas of our lives, including our
farms. We need to reclaim our land and this comes through us
acknowledging our idolatries, witchcraft, shedding of innocent blood
and other evil ways which result in living under the curse.

    James 5:16 “The effective prayer of a righteous man can
    accomplish much.”

    Proverbs 15:29 “The Lord is far from the wicked: but he hears the
    prayer of the righteous.”

    2 Chronicles 7:14 “if my people who are called by my name
    humble themselves, and pray and seek my face and turn from
    their wicked ways, then I will hear from heaven and will forgive
    their sin and heal their land.”

As those who have become the righteousness of God through Christ
Jesus, we should be praying, believing God for His word and promises,
so that our farms and community can prosper.

We stake our claim as sons of God by taking Jesus into every area of
our lives. Jesus taught us to pray “let your Kingdom come on earth
even as it in heaven.”

How to Stake Your Claim
•   Humility is the Starting Point (James 4:10)
•   Seek His Face and Not His Hands (Deuteronomy 4:29)
•   Confess and Repent
•   Ask and You Will Receive (Matthew 7:7 James 4:2)
•   Pray
•   Stand Firm (Ephesians 6:10, Romans 8:37)

God is for us, not against us and He desires for our farms to be
blessed. Take back the ground that is under enemy territory and
dedicate it to the King of kings and Lord of lords.



                                  16
Technology Keys


In Farming God's Way practices, we are quite simply trying to follow
what we see the Creator do as closely as we can, in a manageable
agricultural way.

The six technology keys of Farming God's Way are:

1) No Ploughing
2) 100% cover with God’s blanket that is 2.5cm thick
3) Practicing biodiversity through rotations, and cover cropping
4) Feeding plants from the top
5) Ensuring canopy cover
6) Permanence

1) No Ploughing
There is no ploughing in God’s creation. The earliest mention of
ploughing in Bible times was with very light spear tip tines, which did
not invert the soil, but instead loosened the soil to a very shallow
depth for planting. It was only in the 1800’s when soil inversion really
started with the use of mouldboard ploughs. However, in the last 40
years there has been a big shift of commercial agriculture away from
ploughing again, with hundreds of millions of hectares are farmed
without ploughing around the world currently.

2) 100% Cover with God’s Blanket that is 2.5cm thick
God’s Blanket has the potential to reveal God’s promised
abundance in our fields. It provides the ideal environment for the
healing of the land to take place. So do not burn or even plough in
God’s blanket into the soil as God created it to be on the top.

3) Practise Biodiversity
Plant biodiversity can be practiced through rotations, rotations within
rotations and cover cropping. All of these methods have been shown
to be crucial in maintaining healthy soil and crops.




                                   17
4) Feeding Plants from the Top
In Farming God's Way, we try to emulate what God has shown to us in
His creation by allowing the blanket to gradually decompose on the
soil surface; placing nutrients right near the plant’s roots without
mixing it in; and using high quality Farming God's Way compost as our
preferred input type. The details of Farming God's Way “Surface
Composting Techniques”, for higher value crops are discussed in the
“Vegetable Guide”.

5) Ensuring Canopy Cover
God designed plants to have a dense canopy of leaves and
branches formed by plants in close proximity to each other. We use
the principle of canopy cover to shade out weeds; encourage
competition between plants; and create an optimal inter canopy
climate for crop growth. The way that we achieve canopy cover is by
adjusting plant population densities. Larger plants get planted in wide
rows and in-row spacing but as plants get smaller their row spacing
reduces along with the in-row spacing.

6) Permanence
Permanence brings order into our fields and ensures that planting is
done accurately on the same planting line every season.
Permanence is established by using both measuring ropes and
permanent pegs. In fields where we would typically grow field crops
like maize, sorghum, soyabeans, groundnuts etc we encourage
farmers to place permanent pegs preferably after every 10 rows of
75cm. Permanence will greatly improve your crops and your
profitability.




                                  18
Step by Step Procedure


This section describes the step by step procedure that you should
follow in order to successfully implement Farming God’s Way
techniques on your land.

1)   Tools Required
•    Hoes – sharpened with handles in good condition
•    60cm Stick for making 60cm measuring rope
•    Measuring ropes - used to ensure high standards of plant
     population density and canopy closure. Select a long non-
     stretch, hardy rope, up to 50m long, which can be made out of
     nylon, cable, material tape, braided grass or even stiff wire in
     segments. Tie loops in each end of the measuring rope, peg it in
     on one side, pull the rope tight and peg it in again on the other
     end. Use your 60 cm stick to measure the marker positions on the
     rope. Markers can be made using soft wire or plastic strips at
     exactly 60 cm intervals on the rope. Soft wire – wind 10 turns onto
     the rope. Plastic strips - first loosen the rope so you can thread all
     the strips into the rope at approximately 60cm intervals with the
     60cm stick; then reattach the rope, and slide the plastic strips
     exactly into the 60cm positions and tie them off.
•    Downslope rope – either blank or preferably with 75cm markers
•    Large sheet of paper or book to get a right angle
•    2 × 75cm sticks
•    30 × Permanent pegs 20cm long to be placed after every 10 rows
•    2 × 500ml tins or cups – advised for most soils in poor condition
     where no top dressing is done.
     Alternatively use 2 × 350ml containers if using a top dressing
•    2 × teaspoons or 5ml cups
•    2 × tablespoons or 12ml cups
•    Manure, compost, anthill soil or fertiliser
•    Seed – 25kg/ha

2) Land Preparation
Start approximately 2 months prior to your planting season.
Start small and do everything to a high standard. Let your available
inputs determine the land area to prepare.
Collect large amounts of God’s blanket/mulch to add to your field.
Do not plough or burn God’s Blanket or work it into the soil.
                                     19
If using new unused land, destump, level and clear.
If lands are full of weeds, simply hoe them down at ground level and
leave as God’s Blanket.

3) Establishing the Permanent Baseline, Downslope Rope, 3 Portions
Start at the top of the field and place the 60cm measuring rope
across the slope, on the contour with corner pegs 1 and 2.
Where possible square off an existing boundary or pathway.
Hammer in permanent pegs, on the upslope side at the first and last
measuring rope markers, leaving just 5cm above the ground.
Establish the perfect right angle with a sheet of paper, run a
downslope rope off this and hammer in corner 3.
On the downslope rope divide the field into 3 equal portions – the 1st
2 portions for the staple grain and the 3rd portion for the rotation crop.




4a) Preparing Portion 1 and 2 - Staple Grain e.g. Maize:
Allocate the 1st two portions to your staple grain - example maize
Spacing: 60cm in rows and 75cm rows
Width of hole: Hoe width 12cm
Organic Input Depth: 15cm for compost, manure, and anthill soil.
Inorganic Input Depth: 8cm for DAP, NPK fertiliser.
Soil heap goes down slope.




                                    20
                           Hole Profile

                            Hoe


                                        Soil heap downslope
           Slope



                                     Hole depth
                                15cm for organic inputs
                                8cm for inorganic inputs

Move the 60cm measuring rope down to the second 75cm row using
the two 75cm sticks on either side. Hole out row 2 as described above
then continue to move down row by row until the two maize portions
are completed.
Place permanent pegs after every 10 rows at the 1st and last marker
on the measuring rope, to establish permanence.

4b) Preparing Portion 3 - Rotation Crops Preferably a Legume
The 3rd Portion should be a rotation crop – beans, soya or cowpeas.
The in row spacing of many rotation crops are very narrow, so plant in
a continuous furrow on the contour, instead of using a hole.
Place a rope across the 75cm row as above and dig a 10 cm deep
furrow right across the rope length on the contour. Repeat this every
75cm for beans until the 3rd portion is complete with furrows.
See table in alternative crop section for preparation and planting.




                                  21
 Permanent                   Hole & Furrow Layout
   Peg 1                                                                    Permanent Peg 2
                     60 cm interval Teren rope
                                                                        Paper Square


                                                                                 75 cm Stick
                                    Hole              Soil heap downslope
                                                                                 75 cm Row interval

  Slope                                                                          75 cm Stick
                     Rows across the slope
                                                                                 75 cm Row interval

                                                                                 75 cm Stick
       75 cm Stick      Furrows f or beans, cowpeas, sorghum, groundnuts etc
                                                                                 Peg
 Peg

                                                   Furrow heap downslope
                                                                                  Downslope rope


5) Correcting Acidic Soils
Soils that have been ploughed for many years or in high rainfall areas
are often acidic. Acid soils bind nutrients which are necessary for
plant growth. Woodash and agricultural lime correct acidic soils
which allow for nutrients to be more easily absorbed by the roots. Do
applications for at least 3 years, then do test rows with and without
woodash or lime.
Place a heaped tablespoon of woodash (15ml) in the base of each
planting station, or a flat teaspoon (5ml) of agricultural lime.
For furrow crops evenly spread a heaped tablespoon (15ml) of
woodash every 60cm in the furrow or a flat teaspoon (5ml) of lime.

6) Inputs - Organic and Inorganic Basal Dressing
• Organic Basal Dressing
Use a 500ml cup or tin for compost, fresh manure or anthill soil.
Most soils are depleted and farmers don’t topdress their fields, so we
advocate that farmers increase their organic basal dressing from
350ml to 500ml. Place equal volumes evenly in each hole.

Maize trials with 500ml basal dressing and with no topdressing showed
yield potentials of 7-8 tons/ha with 500ml manure; 8-9 tons/ha with
500ml compost; and 2-3 tons/ha with anthill soil.



                                                 22
If topdressing is an option, then you can reduce basal dressings to
350ml.
For crops planted in furrows, like dry beans, soyabeans, cowpeas or
groundnuts, place 500ml/m in the furrow if planted in depleted soils.
When the soils have improved, you can reduce to 350ml/m. See the
Alternative Crops table.

• Inorganic Basal Dressing
Basal types include DAP or NPK in varying ratio’s and get placed in
the bottom of the holes.
Place a flat tablespoon (12ml) of NPK or DAP in a narrow band across
the bottom of each planting station.
For furrow crops such as beans or soyabeans, simply spread a
heaped teaspoon (8ml) every meter in the furrow.

7) Seed Separation layer and Plant Readiness
Immediately after applying the basal inputs, cover with a 3cm soil
separation layer until the correct seed planting depth remains - 5cm
for maize and 3cm for beans. Fields should be ready for planting at
least 3 weeks before optimal planting time in your region. Southern
African countries plant readiness date is the 31st October, however
you must wait for sufficient rains before planting, as we do not
encourage dry planting.

8) Planting
Prepare to plant only after sufficient rains have fallen and with good
probability of more rains to come. Maize seed should be presoaked
for 6 hours before planting out. Plant “Open Pollinated Variety” (OPV)
seed as this can be replanted for many years.

Maize: Planting depth for Maize – 5cm or a matchbox length. Plant 3
seeds in a straight line - on the left, middle and right hand side.
Beans: Planting depth for beans – 3cm or a matchbox width. Plant the
bean seed at 10cm intervals along the furrow.

Cover with fine, loose soil from the soil heap, until it is level with the
surrounding soil surface. Ensure no stones or hard clods are used when
covering as these can prevent germination.
With maize cover the entire surface of the field with God’s blanket
and 2.5cm thick. For all other crops leave a 5cm gap to allow for
germination to take place.

                                    23
9) Weed Control
Weeds significantly lower crop yields because they compete with the
plants for water, nutrients, light and space. Weeding is best done by
smother mulching with supplementary blanket cover at 100% cover
and 2,5cm thick.




If the blanket is not sufficient, then weed when 1 inch tall – 1 ha can
be weeded in 7 days; but 14 days to weed when weeds are 1 foot
tall. The weed cycle is 10 days. This gives 3 rest days when weeding at
one inch tall; whereas you never catch up if weeds are left to 1 foot
tall before starting to weed. Weed by walking backwards, simply
cutting them off at the soil surface. Remove creeping grasses by
pulling them up and carrying right out of your field. Don’t let weeds
set seed in your field as 1 year of bad weeding leads to 7 years of
problems.




                                  24
10) Maize Thinning
Thin maize at 2-3 weeks after emergence when seedlings are around
20 to 30cm tall. Thin to an average of 2 plants/hole. Look at 3 holes at
a time, not 1, and thin to 6 seedlings per 3 holes. See examples below:

       Thin weakest plant/middle plant if 3 emerge per hole




    Remove middle           Remove weakest             Remove weakest

    Leave 3 in the hole where 1 emerges in the next hole and 2 in the
            following one so there are an average of 2/hole




         7 seedlings per 3 holes, so thin 1 from the hole with 3 in it




                          Remove weakest /middle

11) Top Dress Fertiliser (Maize)
If farmers apply a 500ml basal dressing, then top dressing is not
necessary. If farmers have access to topdressing of Ammonium
Nitrate (AN) or Urea, they can do 2 topdressings.
The 1st at 2-3 weeks after emergence - a heaped teaspoonful or 8ml.
Measure one handwidth on the upslope side of each planting station,
press a 3cm deep hole with a stick, place the teaspoonful of Urea
topdressing and use your foot to cover the small hole with soil.
The 2nd at piping which is just before tassling - a flat teaspoonful or
5ml, one handwidth from each planting station on the upslope side,
in a 3cm deep hole and covered.

                                    25
12) Pre-harvest - Cover Cropping, Relay Cropping or Late Weeding
As the maize leaves start dying back, light penetrates through the
canopy which is the ideal time to sow a cover crop or a relay crop
(See later section). Alternatively, doing one last weeding at this stage
will keep your lands weed free for most of the off season.

13) Topping
Once the maize is fully mature you can break off the tops of the stalks
above the cobs to encourage quicker drying off. Leave the toppings
in the field as God’s blanket.

14) Harvest
Harvest when your maize is physiologically mature, usually 2 months
after tassling. The stalks will look very dry and the cobs will most
probably be hanging down. At this stage the maize is at about 30%
moisture content. Dry cobs further in a suitable place until about 13%
moisture content, before storing in bags.

15) Post Harvest Stalk Lodging
Stand on the base of stem pushing the stalk down between the rows
at a 30 degree angle. Stalk lodging improves blanket cover, reduces
weeds and breaks the life cycle of maize stalk borer.




                                   26
20 Reasons Why we do the How



General Benefits

1)   Minimal Runoff
     Conventional Farming: Typically, 90% of rainfall lost in runoff.
     Farming God's Way: Typically only 6% of rainfall is lost in runoff.

2)   Minimal Erosion
     Conventional Farming: Typically 55 - 250 tons of soil lost per
     hectare per annum in Africa.

     Farming God's Way: Minimal soil lost per hectare per annum.
3)   Improved Infiltration
     Conventional Farming: Kinetic energy from the hammer action of
     raindrops causes crusting resulting in only 10% of rainfall
     penetrating the soil.

     Farming God's Way: God’s Blanket protects the soil from the
     hammer action of the raindrop by absorbing the impact like a
     shock absorber, allowing 94% penetration.
4)   Decrease in Evaporative Loss
     Conventional Farming: The 10% of moisture that infiltrates
     ploughed soil gets exposed to very high surface temperatures,
     causing significant moisture losses through evaporation.

     Farming God's Way: God’s Blanket shades the soil surface,
     keeping it moist and cool, hereby significantly reducing
     evaporation from the soil.
5)   Cooler Soil Temperature Better for Seedling Growth
     Seedlings in Farming God's Way fields take longer to emerge, but
     about 3 weeks after emergence, these seedlings will flourish and
     overtake the seedlings in conventionally farmed fields. The cooler
     soil temperatures are ideal for root establishment, hereby
     producing stronger and healthier plants.




                                     27
6)   First Rain not Wasted
     Conventional Farming: Wait for 1st rains before ploughing. Wait for
     2nd good rain before planting.

     Farming God's Way: Fields prepared before the 1st rains. Can
     plant immediately when the 1st good rains arrive as minimal
     evaporative loss.
7)   Improved Weed Control
     Conventional Farming: Ploughing stimulates weed germination.

     Farming God's Way: No ploughing and 100% surface cover helps
     to significantly reduce weed growth. Smother mulching has
     proven to be one of the most effective ways to combat creeping
     grasses and weeds.


Soil Improvement Benefits
8)   Improved Water Holding Capacity
     Soil with an unploughed sponge-like structure is far better at
     holding moisture, which in turn will result in better drought
     tolerance and yields.
9)   Improved Fertility
     God’s Blanket gradually decomposes over the years, through
     insect and other microbial activity. This is an important part of
     releasing nutrients back into the soil again, hereby improving
     fertility.
10) Nitrogen Fixing Through Rotations with Legumes
     Soil fertility is improved by rotating grain crops with legumes such
     as beans, soyabeans, groundnuts and other crops which fix
     nitrogen. This nitrogen will be available for the following season’s
     crop.
11) Reduced Compaction
     Conventional Farming: Ploughed exposed soil is susceptible to
     slumping, which is the collapse of the whole profile over time, as
     the structure and air spaces get pulverized making the soil much
     more compacted. Ploughing also causes plough pans, which are
     hard soil compaction layers which form at 20-30 cm deep.



                                    28
   Farming God's Way: The soil increases its volume over the years,
   with many old root channels and insect burrows, which
   allow for next year’s crop roots to move quickly down through the
   profile, unrestricted.
12) Improved Aeration
   The sponge effect in soil from not ploughing, through insect
   burrows and decomposing root channels, plays an important role
   in keeping air in the soil profile, which will allow roots to breathe
   even in waterlogged conditions.
13) Soil Microbiology Improvement
   There are 2 basic types of soil microbes, namely aerobic and
   anaerobic, that exist in the soil.

   Conventional Farming: Ploughing buries the aerobic organisms in
   the anaerobic environment and lifts the anaerobic organisms into
   the aerobic environment causing them all to die.

   Farming God's Way: By not burning the blanket or ploughing the
   soil, we create an ideal environment, cool and moist, for an
   abundance of organic life to exist. A healthy soil is a living soil.

Economic Benefits
14) Pest and Disease Control
   Plants under moisture or nutrient stress give off wavelengths of
   light like an attractant, which encourage infestations of pests and
   diseases. Farming God's Way allows for healthy plants that are not
   under stress. It also allows for a healthy balanced soil ecosystem,
   which is the safest environment to prevent an infestation of soil
   pests, through predation.
   The practise of crop rotations also breaks pest and disease
   lifecycles and significantly reduces crop losses through their
   infestations.
15) Reduced Field Preparation Cost and Time
   It has been proven that conventional commercial farmers spend
   3 times as much on fuel, oil, tines, maintenance and repairs of
   machinery compared to a no ploughing technique.
   Our trials plots show that conventional farmers will spend nearly
   twice as long doing land preparation and fertilisation as
   compared to Farming God's Way farmers.

                                  29
16) Reduced Fertiliser Losses
   Every year millions of tons of fertiliser is lost into the catchments
   through runoff losses.
   Farming God's Way minimises these losses, as well as ensuring that
   the fertiliser used is placed accurately in only the root zone of
   each planting station.
17) Improved Drought Tolerance and Risk Spread
   Farming God's Way improves crops drought tolerance by
   conserving moisture:
   •   by having 100% blanket cover
   •   improving soil structure
   •   and increasing the organic carbon levels in the soil

   The practise of the 1/3rd rotation helps to spread the risk of a total
   crop failure in a disaster such as drought or regional pest
   outbreak.
18) Reduced Irrigation Costs
   The number of times that a crop gets irrigated can be drastically
   reduced due to the moisture conservation from not ploughing
   and having a high percentage of God’s Blanket.
19) Improved Crop Efficiency
   Farming God’s Way provides the ideal environment for crops to
   flourish by limiting its stresses, hereby greatly improving yields. The
   roots grow directly under the blanket, accessing the high fertility
   of the decomposing blanket and enjoying the readily available
   moisture in the upper levels of the profile.
20) Yield Improvements
   Dickson’s father got an average of 3 bags per year. Dickson
   inherited this field and changed from conventional farming to
   Farming God's Way.
   Dickson:    1st Year 5 bags (with only 13% blanket cover);
               2nd Year 45 bags
               3rd Year 54 bags
               4th Year 69 bags




                                    30
     Composting


Introduction
Compost is decomposed organic matter that has been broken down
by micro-organisms, especially bacteria and fungi. We refer to
Farming God's Way compost as black gold and it is the best plant
food on the planet. By putting back good quality compost into the
soil, farmers can reap sustainable profitability for the long term.
Compost builds up organic nutrient levels in the soil and helps restore
natural biotic balances in the soil profile. We suggest a compost pile
size of 2m x 2m x 2m. When complete this will drop down to about
3.5m3, which is enough for 1 acre or 1/2 ha of maize inputs. It is not
recommended that you reduce the starting size of the pile to below
1.5m long x 1.5m wide x 2m high, to ensure you get the necessary
heat and decomposition. Start collecting compost materials at crop
canopy closure, or when there is plenty of green material around.
Make as many compost piles as you need for your field size. For large
commercial farms simply join compost pile together in long lines.

Ingredients
Compost is made up of four main ingredients - nitrogen, green,
woody and dry components.
1)   Nitrogen
•    10% of your pile - 15 x 50kg bags of fresh manure
•    If there is no manure use 4m3 of legumes
•    This component is the fuel of the compost pile and gets the
     bacteria going.
2) Green
• 45% of your pile – about 8m3
• Anything that is green when cut. Preferably use within 3-4 days.
3) Woody
• 22.5% of your pile – about 4m3
• Woody material encourages the fungal growth e.g. maize cobs,
   stalks, branches, cardboard and wood shavings.
4) Dry
• 22.5% of your pile – about 4m3
• Dry material adds bulk e.g. thatch grass, leaves and weeds


                                   31
If making compost for vegetable plantings, please see the Vegetable
Guide for guidelines on compost ingredient ratios.

Building the Pile
Collect the dry, woody and manure ingredients first and pile them
separately before collecting the green materials.




•   Maintaining correct ratios is very important
•   Build the pile layer by layer with the 4 main components - start
    with 10cm of woody, then 10cm of dry, then place 20cm of
    green, then 2 bags of fresh manure on top of that. Apply 50-60
    liters of water using buckets onto this completed layer. This makes
    up one complete layer
•   Continue repeating complete layers and watering in until you get
    to the 2m height. There are usually 8-9 complete layers in a pile.

                                  32
Turning the Pile
• 1st turn after 3 days or when the temperature reaches 68°C
• Mix the pile into the adjoining 2m*2m position using a pick, fork or
    a hoe, bringing the outside material into the inside and moving
    the inside material to the outside
• This turning process maintains the correct temperature, mixes
    ingredients, brings material on the outside to the inside so that it
    also gets exposure to high temperatures, aerates the pile with
    oxygen and allows for moisture levels to be checked and
    adjusted if necessary
• If the pile is not turned it will become anaerobic, have a bad
    smell and result in poor quality compost
• A simple guideline is to turn every 3 days for the first 3 turns and
    every 10 days for the next 2 or 3 turns. That is 5 or 6 turns
• After 2 months the turning process is complete
• Once complete, leave the compost to cure thoroughly for
    another 4 months

Temperature
• Ideal temperature range is between 55°C to 68°C
• Maintaining that temperature range will kill all seeds and
   unwanted pathogens
• You can use a temperature probe for accurate readings. A
   cheap alternative is to use an 8mm steel rod instead. After
   inserting it into the pile for a few minutes, see if you can hold on it
   for 5 seconds. If you can the temperature is less than 68°C. If you
   cannot, it’s ready for the pile to be turned
• If you allow the temperature to get above 68°C, desirable
   microbes get killed and carbon gets burned up and wasted
• After the 5th or 6th turn, the compost will only get warm not hot
   and then drop further to ambient temperature during curing

Moisture Content
• Moisture is lost as steam and needs to be replaced
• Try to keep the moisture content of your compost at 50%. You can
   test this by squeezing it in your hand.
   If moisture drips out, it is too wet. If no water drips out, but on
   opening your hand the material does not hold its shape, then it is
   too dry, so add a bucket of water after every 50cm layer.
   If squeezed, no extra moisture drips out and on opening your
   hand the material holds its form, then it is close to the desired 50%
   moisture content
                                    33
•   If you get excessively high rainfall, leave a gentle slope on the top
    of the pile and place thatch grass or grain bags on top to keep
    excess rain water off the pile, which can cool the pile too much




Indicators of Good Compost
• Dark brown colour
• Sweet and rich smell
• Crumbly structure
• You should be able to see thick fungal strands

Compost can be stored as is for years, without degrading or losing its
nutrients and the cost of producing it, is only labour. Compost is the
input that we should see on every farm field as we express faithfulness
with what God in His all sufficiency has put in our hands.




                                   34
Biodiversity Through Alternative Crops



In Farming God's Way we encourage farmers to practise biodiversity
through rotations, relay cropping or growing green manure cover
crops.

Rotations
•   Rotations should occur every 3rd year.
•   Divide lands into 3 equal proportions and allocate the 1st
    two to the staple crop, example maize and the 3rd portion to
    the rotation crop, example beans.

     Year                   1               2               3
     Portion 1            Maize           Beans           Maize
     Portion 2            Maize           Maize           Beans
     Portion 3            Beans           Maize           Maize

•   Rotations break disease and pest cycles, improve soil structure and
    fertility, provide for protein and vitamins in family diets and help
    spread financial risk.
•   Rotate from monocotyledonous to dicotyledonous species.
•   Preferably include a legume such as beans, soyabeans, pigeon
    peas, cowpeas, sugar beans or groundnuts but can include
    sunflower, sweet potato and vegetables.
•   The 3rd rotation portion can be subdivided further to include a
    variety of vegetables for a family’s nutritional supplement.




                                  35
                                Field Scale Layout
          60 cm interval
Stake 1   Teren rope                                               Stake 2




 Slope

                            PORTION 1                                  10 Rows
                                                                       or 7.5m
                                  MAIZE

                                                                   Stake 4
Stake 3




                            PORTION 2                                  10 Rows
                                                                       or 7.5m
                                  MAIZE

Stake 5                                                            Stake 6




                                                                       10 Rows
                            PORTION 3                                  or 7.5m


                           ROTATION CROP
Stake 7                                                            Stake 8


                           Example of a field rotation


Relay Cropping
Relay cropping is planting a second crop when the first one is dying
back and is encouraged in areas where the climate allows for this or
there is enough residual moisture towards the end of the season. Be
careful not to plant the relay crop too early, as this will cause your first
crop yield to suffer drastically when the grain fill stage is happening.
Pigeon peas and cowpeas planted at maize die back are good
examples of Relay Cropping.

Note: Relay cropping is different to inter-cropping (e.g. planting
beans between maize rows). We do not encourage inter-cropping
practices as neither crops achieve their full potential. Instead allow
the rotations plan to accomplish the full benefit of biodiversity to
break disease cycles and get optimal yields amongst many other
benefits.

                                       36
Cover Crops
Cover crops have been used successfully for many years to build up
the percentage cover of God’s Blanket, fix nitrogen, improve soil
fertility, control weeds, prevent erosion and provide high protein
animal fodder. Cover Crops can be grown in most climatic regions
but are best suited to areas with an extended rainy season.
For example in Central Africa, grow cover crops in the short rain
periods in order to recondition the soil for the main cropping season.
In Southern African regions grow cover crops in relays with maize to
make use of residual moisture to get good germination before the
winter.

Cover crop examples:
• Legumes: dolichos lablab, mucuna/velvet bean, cowpeas, alfa
   alfa, peas and hairy vetch
• Monocots: Wheat, rye, oats, triticale, fodder sorghum
• Mixtures: 70% black oats : 30% Vetch and many others

Alternative Crop Guidelines:

                                                  Alternative Crop Guidelines (>600mm Rainfall)
Planting Technique                                               Planting Stations                                 Furrows
Crop                                                      Maize        Sunflower    Cotton       Sorghum    Soyabeans    Cowpeas       Groundnuts
Target Yield                          tons/ha                   7-9         2-2.5      2-2.5        2-2.5          2-5         1.5-2         1.5-2
                                     Rows (cm)                   75            75         75           75           75            75 Split to 37.5
Spacing
                                     In-row (cm)                  60          60         60           10            5            10             8
Preparation depth - Organic Inputs (cm)                           15          15         15           10           10            10            10
or Preparation depth - Inorganic Inputs (cm)                       8           8          8            8            8             8             8
                                         ml                     15             15        15 15ml/60cm        15ml/60cm   15ml/60cm      15ml/60cm
Woodash (Heaped Tablespoon)
                                        kg/ha                  253            253       253       253              253         253            507
                                         ml                      5              5         5 5ml/60cm          5ml/60cm    5ml/60cm       5ml/60cm
or Lime (Flat Teaspoon)
                                        kg/ha                  133            133       133           133          133         133            267
Organic Inputs                           ml                    350            350       350       500ml/m      350ml/m     350ml/m        350ml/m
Compost/Anthill/Manure                  kg/ha                  156            156       156           133           94          94            188
                                         ml                     12              8         8        12ml/m        8ml/m        5ml/m         5ml/m
or Inorganic Fertiliser
                                        kg/ha                  293            196       196           176          117           73           147
Seed Rate                               kg/ha                   25              8        25            10           80           60            80
Planting Depth                         cm                         5            3           2           3            3              3            3
Plant                             Number of Seeds                 3            3           5           1            1              1            1
Thin to                               Plants                      2            2         1-2
Population                            Plants/ha             44,444        44,444      33,333      133,333      266,667       133,333      333,333
                                  1st Topdress ml                8             5             5
Topdress Fertiliser               2nd Topdress ml                5
                                  Total Rate kg/ha             246            94         94




                                                                         37
Management Keys

The management objective of Farming God's Way is to progress into
sustainable profitability. Sustainable profitability is when farmers can
make profits throughout their lifetimes, and be able to pass their
profitable farm businesses down to the next generations.
Improved profitability is achieved by reducing costs, increasing
income and spreading risk, with sustainability brought about through
care.
Profitability - There are many areas where there are substantial cost
saving with Farming God’s Way, including not ploughing, input types,
input placement, ph correction, weeding, fertilisation, OPV seed and
pest control. The improvement of yields and the spreading of risk
through rotation planning substantially increases our income.
Sustainability – by following the Farming God's Way guidelines we can
truly care for the resources that God has given to us including soil,
moisture, nutrients and time.


    The management keys of Farming God’s Way are doing
               things on time, to high standards,
      with minimal wastage and with the Fruit of the Spirit


Key 1: On Time

Ecclesiastes 3:11 “He has made everything appropriate in its time.”

•    Gen 1:14-19 God’s creation in the beginning gives us the platform
     from which we determine time. God created the days, months,
     years and seasons.
•    Land preparation in the off season - Collecting manure, God’s
     Blanket and seed. Making compost well in advance of the
     planting season.
•    Planting on time – in Southern African summer rainfall region you
     lose 120kg yield per day planted after 25th November (provided
     rains have come).
•    On time - supplementary blanket; weeding; thinning; top dressing;
     sowing cover crops; harvest; post-harvest stalk lodging.

                                   38
Key 2: To High Standards


Everything God does is done to high standards. His standards of
excellence were first demonstrated in creation in Genesis chapter 1,
where He created and then examined His own workmanship and
proclaimed that it was good.

•   Three equal portions
•   Permanent pegs after every 10th row
•   Measuring ropes - straight rows and accurate spacing
•   Holes - spacing of 60 by 75, depth according to input
•   Maize planting - 3 seeds in row across bottom of hole
•   Population density of 44,444 maize plants, after thinning
•   Furrows – 10cm deep in straight lines
•   Bean planting – 10cm apart in 75cm rows
•   Keeping farms weed free throughout the year
•   100% surface coverage with God’s Blanket that is 2.5cm thick
•   Accurate sowing of available inputs

Reasons for permanence - planting in the same area year after year:
• Left over nutrients from last year’s crop can be easily accessed by
   the next crop
• pH improvement in the 75cm planting line
• Soil texture gets softer and easier to work
• Decomposed roots from previous crops improve soil fertility and
   leave channels for easy root growth and improved water
   penetration
• Compaction from feet or implements only occurs between rows
• Minimal soil disturbance between plants reduces weed
   emergence

Each measure of excellent standards is there for our good and not for
perfection sake. They have been carefully selected to make sure that
farms will make sustainable profits.

    Colossians 3:23 “Whatever you do, do your work heartily, as for
    the Lord rather than for men,”




                                 39
Key 3: With Minimal Wastage


Biblically the most incredible demonstration of Jesus’ practise of
minimal wastage was shown after He fed the five thousand and He
asked His disciples to pick up what was left over (Matthew 14:14).

God’s minimal wastage examples:
• Water Cycle
• Carbon Cycle

Man’s Wastage:
• Deforestation
• Slash and burn agriculture
• Soil erosion
• Runoff
• Farming large tracts of land at low return is wastage

Farming God's Way ensures minimal wastage by:
• Reducing demand for land through improved yields on the same
   tract of land.
• Conserving soil
• Rainfall penetration
• Reduced runoff
• Conserving soil moisture
• Soil fertility through natural recycling of nutrients
• Plant spacing closing canopy
• Inputs used efficiently
• Time and money saved




                                 40
 Key 4: With the Fruit of the Spirit


Riches without values is not wealth. It’s like fruit that has gone rotten.
Without Christian character we will never have any longevity from our
fruitfulness or profitability. We need to have the “Fruit of the Holy Spirit”
in our lives.

     Matthew 7:16-18 “By their fruits ye shall know them. Do men
     gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? So every good tree
     bears good fruit, but the bad tree bears bad fruit. A good tree
     cannot produce bad fruit, nor can a bad tree produce good
     fruit.”

What kind of fruit is your life bearing?
What kind of fruit is evidenced in your family?
What kind of fruit is evidenced in your community?
What kind of fruit is evidenced in your nation?

     Galatians 5:19-21a “Now the deeds of the flesh are evident,
     which are: immorality, impurity, sensuality, idolatry, sorcery,
     enmities, strife, jealousy, outbursts of anger, disputes, dissensions,
     factions, envying, drunkenness, carousing, and things like these.”

Until such time as we see the deeper truths of God’s Word, the
irrevocable laws of God, being put into practice in people’s lives, the
poor can never come out from under the yoke of oppression. We
must change our ways and align our ways to God’s ways. God calls
us and says:

     Zechariah 1:3 “Return to Me, that I may return to you, says the
     Lord of hosts.”

     Galatians 5:22,23 “But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace,
     patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness and
     self-control”




                                     41
When we bear good fruit there will be a consequence of that good
fruit into our own personal lives and it will be evident to everyone
around us. As disciples of Jesus, we will have that fruit in our families,
our communities and our nations. This is what God desires, He wants
His people, His families, to be blessed in the earth. Blessed with good
wholesome fruit in all areas of their lives.



Conclusion


Remember, everything in life is not just about making a profit, as
many are the rich who die in their misery, so keep a healthy balance
between increase and godliness.

Our aspirations for good management and therefore sustainable
profitability are secondary to a walk worthy of being called His
children. We need to do everything we do as unto the Lord, with all
the fruits of the Holy Spirit evident as a witness of God’s transforming
power in our lives.

In summary of management then, we are aiming to achieve
sustainable profitability by doing things on time, to high standards,
with minimal wastage and with the fruit of the Holy Spirit.




                                     42
Extension

Dream the Farming God’s Way dream of seeing the yoke of
oppression lifted off the poor, allowing them to realise their own God
given potential.

Biblical Motivation
“But Who am I Lord?” you may say. You are sons and daughters of
the most high God. Jesus said, “As I see my Father do that is what I
do. As I hear my Father speaking, that is what I speak”. We simply
need to follow what Jesus has already shown us to do. He came to
serve, make a way for the poor, sick, broken-hearted and downcast
to be saved and to live in the promise of His abundant life. We have
an amazing opportunity to do this through using the tool of Farming
God's Way and fulfilling the commissioning of Isaiah 58 - God’s
chosen fast. In so doing we could even have the privilege of serving
the King (Matthew 25:35) and living in His blessing as we consider the
poor and helpless (Psalm 41:1-3).
The gospel of both Word and deed can be put into place across the
continent to break the curse of poverty and remove the yoke of
oppression. God’s people can create the critical mass of
effectiveness needed to roll out this message of hope to the hopeless.

It Starts With You
If you are going to become a Farming God's Way farmer then go
through the teachings thoroughly and ensure that you start small and
expand with faithfulness. Keep on studying the resources and go to
frequent training sessions.
If you are interested in becoming an accredited Farming God's Way
Trainer then you need to commit yourself to going through the
equipping and relational accreditation process. You will need to:

•   Attend at least 3 training events
•   Plant and manage your own Well Watered Garden for a season
•   Participate in in-field mentoring mission trips
•   Present 18 oral sessions at training events under supervision
•   Contact your regional overseer or local accredited trainer who
    can explain more about this process


                                  43
Remember that Farming God's Way is not an organisation, but a tool
given to the body of Christ. We are not trying to build you into
Farming God's Way, but rather to equip you to use Farming God's
Way. We want to release thousands of trainers to be able to extend
this message of hope under their own coverings of church, mission or
NGO.

Well Watered Garden Implementation
Well Watered Gardens are a wonderful mechanism to roll out
Farming God's Way effectively. These small 6m by 6m demonstration
gardens allow for the training and discipleship of farmers in their own
communities. They are cost effective models and take 2-3 hours to
complete. Although they are small, they are still large enough to train
farmers how to implement the Farming God's Way techniques
successfully on their own farms, as they allow for persons getting
trained to see clearly, with sufficient repetition and opportunities to try
the technique themselves. It is a very interactive demonstration
method and can be lots of fun for all who participate.

Detailed information on Well Watered Garden implementation can
be obtained via the Farming God’s Way Video series as well as the
Trainers Reference Guide.

Pointers for a Successful Community Implementation
•   Commitment of 5/6 years of repeat trainings
•   Find a man/woman of peace
•   Free giving to all – no preferential treatment
•   Size of extension site – keep to Well Watered Garden size
•   If living in or nearby to the community you are going to train, break
    the training sessions down into smaller portions, taking the farmers
    through a production timeline
•   Ensure you train at the correct time of year
•   Organise farmers into small groups
•   Never use incentives or handouts of seed or fertiliser
•   Field evaluations are a great tool for discipling of farmers
•   Prayer




                                    44
Conclusion
As Farming God's Way gets extended widely through the nations, our
encouragement to you is this - never forget that the poor are the
target audience. They have a special place in God’s heart and we
must ensure that we keep focussed on serving them wholeheartedly.

Let’s take this message motivated by obedience to the Word of God,
rooted in Christ-like compassion and deliver it with much love for the
poorest of the poor to be set free from the yoke of poverty.


Resources

   •   Farming Gods Way internet site: www.farming-gods-way.org

   •   Farming God’s Way Video Flash drive includes the Main
       Series, Vegetable Series and Gardens of Faithfulness (14 hrs)

   •   Trainers Reference Guide 2nd Edition. This is an extremely useful
       resource for those wanting to expand their knowledge of
       Farming God's Way. It should be in the hand of every person
       who wishes to train Farming God’s Way.

   •   Farming God's Way Field Guide:
       This abbreviated manual is specifically for community training.
       It can be downloaded from the Resources tab on the Farming
       God's Way website. Translations of this guide are also
       available for download from the website.

   •   Facilitators Study Guide – A series of chapter based questions
       to use whilst facilitating the video series to encourage
       discussion

   •   Farming God's Way Vegetable Guide

   •   Farming God's Way Gardens of Faithfulness material

   •   Farming God's Way YouTube Channel with many translations

   •   General Enquiries: info@farming-gods-way.org


                                  45
